semgrep glossary (#1155)
semgrep/semgrep-docs: docs/writing-rules/glossary.md

---
slug: glossary
title: SAST and rule-writing glossary
hide_title: true
description: Definitions of static analysis and Semgrep rule-writing terms.
tags:
  - Rule writing
---

# Static analysis and rule-writing glossary

> The definitions provided here are specific to each term's meaning and use in Semgrep.

Author: Which "same thing" are you referring to here?

> The definitions provided here are specific to each term's meaning and use in Semgrep.

Reviewer: Specifically the line "The definitions provided here are specific to each term's meaning and use". I'd be confused because if both are specific to Semgrep, why is the Rule-writing glossary different?

## Constant propagation

> Refers to state of a variable remaining constant throughout the program. Semgrep can analyze whether a variable carries a constant value at a given point. Both Semgrep OSS and Semgrep Pro Engine perform this analysis, with Semgrep Pro able to track the propagation across files.

Author: Hi @emjin can you explain what the difference is between:

A: Constant propagation can analyze whether a variable carries a constant value at a given point.
B: Constant propagation is a type of analysis where values known to be constant are substituted in later uses. 

what does it mean to be "known as constant"?

In the docs, it says:
> This analysis tracks whether a variable must carry a constant value at a given point in the program. 

I was assuming that Semgrep is tracking whether some variable assignment such as X = 59 is always true?

> Refers to state of a variable remaining constant throughout the program. Semgrep can analyze whether a variable carries a constant value at a given point. Both Semgrep OSS and Semgrep Pro Engine perform this analysis, with Semgrep Pro able to track the propagation across files.

Reviewer: > By substitution, you mean that Semgrep can detect that print(x) is equal to print(2) (In your example below) because Semgrep can detect the assignment and propagate it. Semgrep "substitutes" the value of x and thus detects print(2)

I agree with this statement. However, I want to clarify that we only do this substitution for values we detect to be constant. That is so that we can avoid errors in our analysis.

> Constant here doesn't mean that the value never changes over the course of the program; it just means that we defined it as a constant in our rule, i.e. the string "abcd" is always "abcd" - because we defined it in the pattern operator.

I disagree with this statement. Constant does mean that the value never changes over the course of the program. We only propagate values for variables that are constant.

> You can write checks for constant propagation through the use of `pattern-not` in conjunction with `pattern` or `metavariable-comparison`.

Author: I added the JS equivalent of this example in :)

It is enabled by default when writing rules and [can be disabled](/data-flow/constant-propagation/#disabling-constant-propagation).

## Cross-file analysis

Also known as **interfile analysis**. This analysis traces or tracks data and its transformations across files, such as when a variable is defined in one file but used in another.

Cross file analysis can be paired with taint analysis to detect unsanitized variables flowing from a source to a sink.

Also known as **interfile analysis**. Available in Semgrep Pro Engine.

## Cross-function analysis

This analysis traces or tracks data and its transformations across functions in a single file, such as when a globally-scoped variable is defined in one function but used in another.

> Also known as **intrafile** or **interprocedural** analysis. Available in Semgrep Pro Engine.

Author: Something tells me I should write a table of all the analyses we do and when (by default, pro toggle on, etc.)

- Positive and negative
- True or false

These yield the following combinations:

<dl>
<dt>True positive</dt>
<dd>The rule detected a piece of code it was intended to find.</dd>
<dt>False positive</dt>
<dd>The rule detected a piece of code it was not intended to find.</dd>
<dt>True negative</dt>
<dd>The rule correctly skipped over a piece of code it wasn't meant to find.</dd>
<dt>False negative</dt>
<dd>The rule failed to detect a piece of code it should have found.</dd>
</dl>

Not to be confused with **risk matrices**.

## Finding

A finding is the core result of Semgrep's analysis. Findings are generated when a Semgrep rule matches a piece of code. Findings can be security issues, bugs, or code that doesn't follow coding conventions.

## Fully-qualified name

A fully-qualified name refers to a name which uniquely identifies a class, method, type, or module. Languages such as C# and Ruby use `::` to distinguish between fully-qualified names and regular names.

Not to be confused with **tokens**.

## l-value (left-, or location-value)

An expression that denotes an object in memory; a memory location, something that you can use in the left-hand side (LHS) of an assignment.

> Compare to [r-value](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/c-language/l-value-and-r-value-expressions?view=msvc-170).

Reviewer: I don't think we need to compare this to r-value! The main thing is that it can be used in the left hand side of an assignment. I'd also lean against including the microsoft docs, which might give the impression that l-values are only a C/C++ concept.

If we want to clarify this more, we could give some examples. `x` and `arr[2]` are l-values (you could write `x = 122` or `arr[2] = "semgrep"`. However, `2 + 2` is not an l-value (you could not write `2 + 2 = 122`).

## Metavariable

A metavariable is an abstraction that lets you match something even when you don't know exactly what it is you want to match. It is similar to capture groups in regular expressions. All metavariables begin with a `$` and can only contain uppercase characters, digits, and underscores.

## Propagator

> A propagator is any code that alters a piece of data as the data moves across the program. This includes functions, reassignments, and so on.

Reviewer: This definition might call into question why the user has to write their own propagators. I would say that in the context of a rule, propagators are pieces of code that you specify will always pass forward the tainted nature of data. This is particularly important in intraprocedural taint, where Semgrep cannot analyze other functions to figure out whether they will propagate taint or not. It also allows users to fine-tune Semgrep's analysis (because sometimes (often?) we get it wrong!)

Author: You're referring to having to spell out the functions / assignments in the `pattern-propagators` key, right?

I'm imagining that if it's intraprocedural taint, since it's within the function, there may be many assignments, so the engine would have to be told it's specifically `X = somePureFunction(Y)`?

I'll add your explanation in.

Author: ![image](https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/assets/20766840/7576a855-ba13-4677-98a3-4a6fb2e1d9be)

Reviewer: Definitely for intraprocedural taint you have to specify a lot of propagators yourself because we can't figure out if a function will act as a propagator.

## Rule (Semgrep rule)

A rule is a specification of the patterns that Semgrep must match to the code to generate a finding. Rules are written in YAML. Without a rule, the engine has no instructions on how to match code.

Rules can be run on either Semgrep OSS Engine or Semgrep Pro Engine.

There are two types of rules: search and taint.

<dl>
<dt>Search rules</dt>
<dd>Rules default to this type. Search rules simply detect matches based on the patterns described by a rule.</dd>
<dt>Taint rules</dt>
<dd>Taint rules make use of Semgrep's taint analysis in addition to default search functionalities. Taint rules are able to specify sources, sinks, and propagators of data as well as sanitizers of that data. For more information, see Taint analysis documentation (tk link)</dd>
</dl>

<!-- how can we say that search rules are semantic if no analysis is performed on the value of data, such as variables? Or are there levels of semantic understanding that semgrep can perform? -->

> 

Reviewer: Here are a few things we do for search mode rules:
1. During the parsing and matching phases, we might interpret syntactically different code as semantically the same. (I can't think of a good example right now but you could imagine that we could parse for loops and while loops into the same ast type, and then for loops would match while loops)
2. If you use the fully qualified name of a function in the pattern, we will match that function even when it isn't referenced with the fully qualified name
3. We perform constant propagation (it's really just constant folding, we don't do anything fancy, but it's still semantic)
4. We have typed metavariables, which require some amount of type inference

Author: I added these in! Thank you. 

![image](https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/assets/20766840/c2bc858c-1dd7-454e-a33a-0a46a664a689)

## Sanitizers

> A sanitizer is any function that can clean untrusted or tainted data. Data from untrusted sources, such as user inputs, may be tainted with unsafe characters. Sanitizer functions ensure that unsafe characters are removed or stripped from the input.

Reviewer: I believe sanitizers in Semgrep rules can be any piece of code, like propagators. One example of a sanitizer you could write is `(int) x` (casting x to an int), which in some contexts would make it safe

An example of a sanitizer is the [<i class="fas fa-external-link fa-xs"></i> `DOMPurify.sanitize(dirty);`](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) function from the  DOMPurify package in Javascript.

> ## Single-file analysis

Reviewer: I don't love the term "single-file analysis" because it sounds a bit like we only analyze one file. The more accurate term is `within-a-file analysis`, and I try to use that. That being said, I do know that sometimes we say it

Author: Preferring "per-file" as we discussed in Slack.

> Also known as intrafile analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track data and its transformations across functions, such as when a variable is defined in one function but used in another.

Reviewer: Technically, intrafile analysis only means that Semgrep performs its analyses within a file. We do use it as a shorthand for cross-function analysis, but that's mostly out of laziness.

Author: Saying "cross-function" or "interprocedural" doesn't provide a boundary, though? If I were new to SAST, I might wrongly conflate cross-function with cross-file because functions can be across different files?

Author: I guess the question is, from the perspective of the user, what is the between interprocedural and intrafile?

Reviewer: I think I would say that "interprocedural taint" and "pro intrafile analysis" are the same thing. Later, "pro intrafile analysis" might include more things, but right now its main benefit over oss analysis is interprocedural taint.

However, "intrafile analysis" is still a standard term and I'm not comfortable with us redefining it even though we do do this as a shorthand.

Author: So - it's not good for us to conflate interprocedural with intrafile. Got it.

## Single-function analysis

> Also known as intraprocedural analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track data and its transformations within a single function.

Reviewer: Minor nit that I more often see phrases like "the flow of information". I might also clarify that this is a restriction which applies to taint analysis only in the OSS engine.

---
slug: glossary
title: SAST and rule-writing glossary
hide_title: true
description: Definitions of static analysis and Semgrep rule-writing terms.
tags:
  - Rule writing
---

# Static analysis and rule-writing glossary

The definitions provided here are specific to each term's meaning and use in Semgrep.

## Constant propagation

<!-- Refers to state of a variable remaining constant throughout the program. Semgrep can analyze whether a variable carries a constant value at a given point. Both Semgrep OSS and Semgrep Pro Engine perform this analysis, with Semgrep Pro able to track the propagation across files. -->

> Constant propagation is a type of analysis where values known to be constant are substituted in later uses. Semgrep can perform constant propagation across files, unless you are running Semgrep OSS, which can only propagate within a function.

Author: This is probably the trickiest one to write; I am clarifying with Emma if my simplification loses some nuance [in this comment](https://github.com/semgrep/semgrep-docs/pull/1155#discussion_r1573209262).

> Constant propagation is a type of analysis where values known to be constant are substituted in later uses. Semgrep can perform constant propagation across files, unless you are running Semgrep OSS, which can only propagate within a function.

Author: We added a rule & pattern example to help out with clarity a bit.

## Finding

A finding is the core result of Semgrep's analysis. Findings are generated when a Semgrep rule matches a piece of code. Findings can be security issues, bugs, or code that doesn't follow coding conventions.

## Fully qualified name

A **fully qualified name** refers to a name which uniquely identifies a class, method, type, or module. Languages such as C# and Ruby use `::` to distinguish between fully qualified names and regular names.

Not to be confused with **tokens**.

## l-value (left-, or location-value)

An expression that denotes an object in memory; a memory location, something that you can use in the left-hand side (LHS) of an assignment. For example, `x` and `array[2]` are l-values, but `2+2` is not.

## Metavariable

A metavariable is an abstraction that lets you match something even when you don't know exactly what it is you want to match. It is similar to capture groups in regular expressions. All metavariables begin with a `$` and can only contain uppercase characters, digits, and underscores.

## Propagator

A propagator is any code that alters a piece of data as the data moves across the program. This includes functions, reassignments, and so on.

> When you write rules that perform taint analysis, propagators are pieces of code that you specify through the `pattern-propagator` key, as code that always passes tainted data. This is especially relevant when Semgrep performs intraprocedural taint analysis, as there as is no way for Semgrep to infer or guess which lines of code propagate taint. Thus, explicitly listing propagators is the only way for Semgrep to know if tainted data could be passed within your function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you write rules that perform taint analysis, propagators are pieces of code that you specify through the `pattern-propagator` key as code that always passes tainted data. This is especially relevant when Semgrep performs intraprocedural taint analysis, as there is no way for Semgrep to infer or guess which lines of code propagate taint. Thus, explicitly listing propagators is the only way for Semgrep to know if tainted data could be passed within your function.
```

## Rule (Semgrep rule)

A rule is a specification of the patterns that Semgrep must match to the code to generate a finding. Rules are written in YAML. Without a rule, the engine has no instructions on how to match code.

Rules can be run on either Semgrep OSS Engine or Semgrep Pro Engine.

There are two types of rules: search and taint.

<dl>
<dt>Search rules</dt>
<dd>Rules default to this type. Search rules detect matches based on the patterns described by a rule. There are several semantic analyses that search rules perform, such as:
    <ul>

>     <li>Being able to interpret syntactically different code as semantically equivalent</li>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <li>Interpreting syntactically different code as semantically equivalent</li>
```

An example of a sanitizer is the [<i class="fas fa-external-link fa-xs"></i> `DOMPurify.sanitize(dirty);`](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) function from the  DOMPurify package in JavaScript.

## Single-file analysis

Also known as intrafile analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track the flow of information, such as when a variable is defined in one function but used in another.

## Single-function analysis

Also known as intraprocedural analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track data and its transformations within a single function.

## Sink

In taint analysis, a sink is any vulnerable function that is called with potentially tainted or unsafe data.

## Source

In taint analysis, a source is any piece of code that assigns or sets tainted data, typically user input.

## Taint analysis

> Taint analysis tracks and traces the flow of untrusted or unsafe data. Data coming from sources such as user inputs could be unsafe and used as an attack vector, if these inputs are not sanitized. Taint analysis provides a means of tracing that data as it moves through the program from untrusted sources to vulnerable functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Taint analysis tracks and traces the flow of untrusted or unsafe data. Data coming from sources such as user inputs could be unsafe and used as an attack vector if these inputs are not sanitized. Taint analysis provides a means of tracing that data as it moves through the program from untrusted sources to vulnerable functions.
```

## Finding

A finding is the core result of Semgrep's analysis. Findings are generated when a Semgrep rule matches a piece of code. Findings can be security issues, bugs, or code that doesn't follow coding conventions.

## Fully qualified name

A **fully qualified name** refers to a name which uniquely identifies a class, method, type, or module. Languages such as C# and Ruby use `::` to distinguish between fully qualified names and regular names.

Not to be confused with **tokens**.

## l-value (left-, or location-value)

An expression that denotes an object in memory; a memory location, something that you can use in the left-hand side (LHS) of an assignment. For example, `x` and `array[2]` are l-values, but `2+2` is not.

## Metavariable

A metavariable is an abstraction that lets you match something even when you don't know exactly what it is you want to match. It is similar to capture groups in regular expressions. All metavariables begin with a `$` and can only contain uppercase characters, digits, and underscores.

## Propagator

A propagator is any code that alters a piece of data as the data moves across the program. This includes functions, reassignments, and so on.

> When you write rules that perform taint analysis, propagators are pieces of code that you specify through the `pattern-propagator` key as code that always passes tainted data. This is especially relevant when Semgrep performs intraprocedural taint analysis, as there is no way for Semgrep to infer or guess which lines of code propagate taint. Thus, explicitly listing propagators is the only way for Semgrep to know if tainted data could be passed within your function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you write rules that perform taint analysis, propagators are pieces of code that you specify through the `pattern-propagator` key as code that always passes tainted data. This is especially relevant when Semgrep performs intraprocedural taint analysis, as there is no way for Semgrep to infer or guess which function calls propagate taint. Thus, explicitly listing propagators is the only way for Semgrep to know if tainted data could be passed within your function.
```

Constant propagation is applied to all rules unless [it is disabled](/data-flow/constant-propagation/#disabling-constant-propagation).

For example, given the following pattern:
```yaml
...
patterns:
- pattern: console.log(2)
```
And the following code snippet:
```javascript showLineNumbers
const x = 2;
//highlight-next-line
console.log(x);
```

The pattern operator `pattern: print(2)` tells Semgrep to match line 2 because it propagates the value `2` from the assignment in line 1 to the `console.log()` function in line.

Constant propagation is one of the many analyses that differentiate Semgrep from grep.

## Cross-file analysis

Also known as **interfile analysis**. Cross-file analysis takes into account how information flows between files. In particular, cross-file analysis includes **cross-file taint analysis**, which tracks unsanitized variables flowing from a source to a sink through arbitrarily many files. Other analyses performed across files include constant propagation and type inference.

> Cross-file analysis is usually used in contrast to intrafile or per-file analysis, where each file is analyzed as a standalone block of code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cross-file analysis is usually used in contrast to intrafile (also known as per-file analysis), where each file is analyzed as a standalone block of code.
```

Not sure if it's clear that these are the same thing

Semgrep OSS is limited to per-file analysis.

## Cross-function analysis

Cross-function analysis means that interactions between functions are taken into account. This improves taint analysis, which tracks unsanitized variables flowing from a source to a sink through arbitrarily many functions.

> For the purpose of its usage in Semgrep, cross-function analysis implies intrafile or per-file analysis. Each file is still analyzed as a standalone block, but within the file it takes into account how information flows between functions.

Author: Rewrote it very slightly :)

</dl>

<!-- how can we say that search rules are semantic if no analysis is performed on the value of data, such as variables? Or are there levels of semantic understanding that semgrep can perform? -->

## Sanitizers

A sanitizer is any piece of code, such as a function or [a cast](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/types/casting-and-type-conversions#explicit-conversions), that can clean untrusted or tainted data. Data from untrusted sources, such as user inputs, may be tainted with unsafe characters. Sanitizers ensure that unsafe characters are removed or stripped from the input.

An example of a sanitizer is the [<i class="fas fa-external-link fa-xs"></i> `DOMPurify.sanitize(dirty);`](https://github.com/cure53/DOMPurify) function from the  DOMPurify package in JavaScript.

## Per-file analysis

Also known as intrafile analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track the flow of information, such as when a variable is defined in one function but used in another.

## Per-function analysis

> Also known as intraprocedural analysis. This refers to a tool's ability to trace or track data and its transformations within a single function.

Author: Mirrored!

---
slug: glossary
title: SAST and rule-writing glossary
hide_title: true
description: Definitions of static analysis and Semgrep rule-writing terms.
tags:
  - Rule writing
---

# Static analysis and rule-writing glossary

The definitions provided here are specific to Semgrep.

## Constant propagation

<!-- Refers to state of a variable remaining constant throughout the program. Semgrep can analyze whether a variable carries a constant value at a given point. Both Semgrep OSS and Semgrep Pro Engine perform this analysis, with Semgrep Pro able to track the propagation across files. -->

> Constant propagation is a type of analysis where values known to be constant are substituted in later uses, such as detecting matches. Semgrep can perform constant propagation across files, unless you are running Semgrep OSS, which can only propagate within a file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constant propagation is a type of analysis where values known to be constant are substituted in later uses, allowing the value to be used to detect matches. Semgrep can perform constant propagation across files, unless you are running Semgrep OSS, which can only propagate within a file.
```

Tiiiiny nit the word "use" is actually referring to the use in the code. For instance, in the example given, on line 30 `x` is declared, and on line 32 `x` is used. ("declared" and "used" are the technical PL terms, which is why this caught my attention.) Personally I think we can also just eliminate the clause after "later uses", because the example conveys it more clearly.
